---
layout: presentation
title: 'Spectroscopic Data in R and Validation of Soft Classifiers: Classifying Cells and Tissues by Raman Spectroscopy'
tags: 
- literature
- reference
- presentation
authors: 'C. Beleites, C. Krafft, J. Popp and V. Sergo'
meeting: The R User Conference useR! 2011
location: Coventry/UK
type: oral
pdf: 'Beleites2011b.pdf'
keywords: spectroscopy, soft classification, validation, brain tumour diagnosis
---
Medical diagnosis of cells and tissues is an important aim in biospectroscopy. The data analytical
task involved frequently is classification. Classification traditionally assumes both reference and
prediction to be *hard*, i.e. stating exactly one of the defined classes.  In reality, the
reference diagnoses may suffer from substantial uncertainty, or the sample can comprise a mixture of
the underlying classes, e.g. if sample heterogeneity is not resolved or if the sample is actually
undergoing a transition from one class to another (e.g. rather continuous de-differentiation of
tumour tissues). Such samples may be labelled with *partial* or *soft* class memberships.

<!-- end excerpt -->
Many classification methods produce soft output, e.g. posterior probabilities. Methods like
logistic regression can also use soft training data. Yet, for medical diagnostic applications it is
even more important to include soft samples into the model validation. Excluding ambiguous samples
means retaining only clear (i.e. easy) cases. Such a test set is not representative of the original
unfiltered population, and creates a risk of obtaining overly optimistic estimates of the model
performance.

With `softclassval`
([softclassval.r-forge.r-project.org](http://softclassval.r-forge.r-project.org)), we introduce a
framework to calculate commonly used classifier performance measures like sensitivity and specificity
also for samples with soft reference and prediction. Briefly, if the soft class labels are
interpreted as uncertainty, best and worst case as well as expected performance are obtained via the
weak, strong and product conjunction \[1\]. For the mixture interpretation, weighted versions of
well-known regression performance measures like mean absolute and root mean squared errors are
derived.

As real world example, we classify 37015 Raman (thereof 55% soft) spectra of 80 brain tumour patients
into "normal", "low grade", and "high grade" tissue morphologies in order to delineate excision
borders during surgical treatment of the tumours. Thus, borderline cases are our actual target
samples. We demonstrate spectroscopy-related functionality supplied by `hyperSpec`
([hyperspec.r-forge.r-project.org](http://hyperspec.r-forge.r-project.org)) and its conjoint use with
other packages.

Financial support by the Associazione per i Bambini Chirurgici del Burlo (IRCCS Burlo Garofolo
Trieste) and of the European Union via the Europ채ischer Fonds f체r Regionale Entwicklung (EFRE) and
the "Th체ringer Ministerium f체r Bildung, Wissenschaft und Kultur" (Project: B714-07037) is highly
acknowledged.

References

\[1\]:	Gottwald, S.: "Many-valued logic". In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy  (Spring 2010 ed.).
