---
layout: presentation
title: 'Validation of Soft Classifiers for Cells and Tissues'
tags: 
- literature
- reference
- presentation
authors: 'C. Beleites, C. Krafft, J. Popp and V. Sergo'
meeting: FTIR Spectroscopy in Microbiological and Medical Diagnostics
location: Robert-Koch-Institute, Berlin/Germany
type: poster
pdf: 'Beleites-20111020-RKI.pdf'
keywords: spectroscopy, soft classification, validation, brain tumour diagnosis
---
Medical diagnosis of cells and tissues is an important aim in biospectroscopy. The data analytical
task involved frequently is classification. Classification traditionally assumes both reference and
prediction to be *hard*, i.e. stating exactly one of the defined classes.  Like fuzzy cluster
analysis, soft classification uses partial memberships rather than hard labels, thus expressing
uncertainty or mixed cell populations.

<!-- end excerpt --> 
Many classification methods produce soft output, e.g. posterior probabilities. Some methods also use
partial training labels. Yet, for medical diagnostic applications it is even more important to
include soft samples into the model validation. Excluding ambiguous samples means retaining only
clear (i.e. easy) cases. Such a test set is not representative of the original unfiltered population,
and creates a risk of obtaining overly optimistic estimates of the model performance. While mixed
populations and uncertain reference are more common for tissue classification, a second problem
concerns cells as well: The classical calculation of performance measures such as sensitivity,
specificity, and predictive values often comprises a lossy translation of e.g. posterior
probabilities into hard class labels, a practice long criticized in the statistical community
(e.g. \[1\]) which also constitutes a major hindrance for the optimization of classifiers.

We introduce a framework to calculate classifier performance measures for
samples with soft reference and prediction which also avoids the dichotomization loss. Briefly, if
the partial memberships are interpreted as uncertainty, best and worst case as well as expected
performance are obtained via the weak, strong and product conjunction \[2\]. For the mixture
interpretation, weighted versions of well-known regression performance measures like mean absolute
and root mean squared errors result.  A ready-to-use implementation (R package) is available at
[http://softclassval.r-forge.r-project.org](http://softclassval.r-forge.r-project.org).

As real world example, we classify 37 015 Raman (thereof 55% soft) spectra of 80 brain tumor patients
into "normal", "low grade", and "high grade" tissue morphologies in order to delineate excision
borders during surgical treatment of the tumors. Thus, borderline cases are our actual target
samples.

Financial support by the Associazione per i Bambini Chirurgici del Burlo (IRCCS Burlo Garofolo
Trieste) and of the European Union via the Europäischer Fonds für Regionale Entwicklung (EFRE) and
the "Thüringer Ministerium für Bildung, Wissenschaft und Kultur" (Project: B714-07037) is highly
acknowledged.

References  
\[1\]:	J. Cohen: "The cost of dichotomization", Applied Psychological Measurement, 7, 249 – 253 (1983).  
\[2\]:	Gottwald, S.: "Many-valued logic". In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy  (Spring 2010 ed.).
